[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway. So
Tracy, we're recording this March 24th
and of course almost all of our episodes
lately have been about the war in Iran.
>> Mhm. But what's interesting or what's a
little weird is that just prior to the
war, literally days or maybe hours, the
biggest story in the world was actually
about defense and you know, the DoD.
That's right. So you are referring to
Anthropic.
>> Yeah, yeah. And it's disagreement, to
put it mildly, with the Department of
War?
>> Yeah, exactly. This was the biggest
story going right up on the eve of the
war in Iran. And of course, obviously
there was this contract and Anthropic's
technology was used by the Defense
Department. So it was not a disagreement
about the use of AI per se in war, but
the question of the degree of to which
AI could be used for autonomous weapon
systems on their own without a human in
the loop. And surveillance, that was
also part of
>> And surveillance, this was another key
element. But you're right. So we've
heard this expression autonomous weapons
pop up more and more, especially in
recent days. And I have a lot of
questions over what exactly that means
because my impression is the US military
certainly has been using AI for some
time. And so we're really talking about
degrees here of autonomy, right? And so
Yes.
>> If you if you think about an autonomous
weapon, I think your mind could go fully
Terminator and you know, there's like a
murder robot out there that's making its
own decisions on which people or places
to target. And then you got levels below
that, right? Where AI is kind of helping
humans to come up with strategic
decisions. Right. So if there was a
missile coming and you have a missile
defense system,
I don't think you want a human in the
loop is like, "Okay, here are the
coordinates XYZ that we think it's going
to hit. At this point in time we think
the missile will be here. Are you cool
with firing it?" I think everyone's
probably okay with that level of
autonomy. But I have a feeling that to
your point exactly, a lot of this
discussion and maybe it's core to what
Anthropic and the Department of Defense
were disagreeing on, I have a feeling a
lot of this is going to
come down to definitions. My guess is
that there is not one shared agreement
of this is an autonomous weapon system
and this one is not. Absolutely. And of
course, there are also questions over
exactly how places like the Department
of Defense, not only how they define it,
but once they have those definitions,
whether or not certain companies trust
them Yeah, totally. to stick to those
policies because the US will say, "Well,
our policy is not to surveil Right.
moment. So if you're Anthropic, you
don't need to worry about that." Clearly
Anthropic feels otherwise or say they
do. So there are all these really
interesting thematic questions that pop
up from all of this. Totally. And then
there's the question of, "Okay, here's a
technology and the government says we
believe that we can use this to make the
country safer. What, you're not going to
let us do it?" Like private corporation,
there's some very interesting questions
about the role of corporate power
vis-a-vis the government and so forth.
Anyway,
this is uh something that has become
even more timely. There were reports
even in the early days of the Iran war
about these AI systems having been used
perhaps in target selection, but we
don't really know. None of the reporting
is like that clear. I don't think that
they're going out and advertising, "This
is the strike location."
>> exactly how we're using AI.
>> This is exactly how we're using AI and
so forth. But this is obviously a huge
debate and war aside, it's only going to
grow and just as it AI is going to grow,
it seems in so many different areas.
Anyway, I'm really excited to say we
really do have the perfect guest,
someone who's been writing and thinking
about this stuff for a long time. When
we talk to an AI expert, I mark the
dividing line as like, "Were you talking
about AI prior to when ChatGPT was
released?" As like I take a little bit
more seriously the people who are in
this space prior to November 2022.
Anyway, I'm very excited to say we're
going to be speaking with Paul Scharre.
He's the executive vice president at the
Center for a New American Security and
he's the author of two books related to
this. One is most recent, Four
Battlegrounds: Power in the Age of
Artificial Intelligence. And then prior
to that, he is the author of Army of
None: Autonomous Weapons and the Future
of War. He was previously in the office
of the Secretary of Defense, also
previous Army Ranger. So truly the
perfect guest. So Paul, thank you so
much for uh coming on Odd Lots.
Oh, thank you for having me. Very
excited to be here. Why don't we start?
I mentioned I had a feeling that maybe
the definition of an autonomous weapon
is a contested one. But if I say to you,
"What's an autonomous weapon?" What's an
autonomous weapon?
So I think you're right from the
beginning that there is not a unified
definition that everyone agrees on. The
Defense Department has their definition
that's written in their policy. I think
conceptually, I think the distinction
really is a weapon that is choosing its
own target on the battlefield.
>> And it's not where we are today, right?
Now today people are choosing those
targets.
But it is kind of a spectrum because we
do have examples of weapons that have
some measure of autonomy. A good analogy
might be self-driving cars where
conceptually, like okay, a self-driving
car would be where the AI is driving the
car. But then you get into an actual car
today and a lot of them have intelligent
cruise control, automatic braking,
automated self-parking. They have all
these like automated features that are
kind of creeping you in this direction
where the AI is taking over more and
more control for what the vehicle can
do. And it's actually pretty similar
thing in the military space as well. So
Joe mentioned that had we been having
this conversation even a month ago now,
it probably would have had fewer
concrete examples of AI-enabled
weaponry, let's say, or strategy. When
the Pentagon talks about its advanced AI
tools that it's deploying for the Iran
conflict, what are some examples that
you're seeing right now that are
different to say, maybe just a year ago
when we had another Iran conflict?
Right. So there's a couple ways in which
the Pentagon is using AI right now. One
is narrow AI systems that have been
around for over a decade now that do
image classification, for example. So
this was the military's original Project
Maven almost a decade ago where they
took machine learning image classifiers
to sift through drone video feeds and
satellite images to identify objects.
Okay, here's a building, here's a
person, here's a vehicle. That's pretty
mature technology. Now, what's come out
in just the last couple weeks that's
really quite interesting is that in the
midst of this huge messy public breakup
between Anthropic and the Pentagon, we
found out that in fact Anthropic's AI
tools are being used by the US military
to help plan the war against Iran.
That's obviously a different kind of AI
tool, AI large language models, AI being
used to write code, AI agents. And
that's being used in a different way.
It's really helping intel analysts sift
through just the massive amount of data
that the US military has. And so if you
can imagine the problem that the
military is facing right now, when
they're looking at targets in Iran, the
US military has flown over 6,000 sorties
against Iran. The Iranian military
architecture is degraded in a lot of
ways. The US military has like bombed a
lot of targets. There are mobile
targets, senior Iranian commanders,
mobile missile launchers and air defense
systems and drone launchers. The US
military has got to bring all that
information together and find out where
are these targets right now and where is
there an aircraft that has the right
bombs on it to take these targets out.
And that's how AI is being used to help
basically process and understand all
that information. When I think about the
description that you gave for that, I
sometimes think like, could it be that
Now, I don't think that using
Anthropic's technology means that they
go into Claude.ai and say, "Give us a
list of suitable targets for sorties."
But it could be that could it be
something like that? I'm sure there's a
different interface and so forth. But is
that a completely ridiculous way of
essentially framing the service that AI
is providing right now?
So the way that these AI tools are being
integrated are through a existing system
called the Maven Smart System, which is
built by Palantir, and that fuses all
this data together. So you basically
have an existing architecture for data
management for intel analysts that the
military has that brings together all
these different forms of data. You might
have satellite imagery, geolocation
data, signals intelligence, other forms
of information.
That's pretty great for intel analysts,
but that's also really unwieldy because
how does a human understand all that
data and process it? And that's where
the large language model tools, whether
it's Claude or other companies can be
valuable, is they can be a way for a
human to interact with that data. To
basically task a large language model to
say, "Okay, here's a bunch of data I'm
giving you. I want you to look for
intersections in things, right? I want
you to look for a place where we have
satellite imagery and some other forms
of intelligence that can help identify
the location of, you know, some missile
launcher, Mhm. And then humans can look
at that and help one just like find
where are all these targets. And then
it's helpful in planning, too. A human
could say, "Okay, here's this list of
potential targets that I have. Now,
they're scattered all over Iran. Iran is
a really big country. I want to map
these to locations for US aircraft at
different bases across the region. What
are available aircraft and what are
available munitions on those aircraft
that can be used to take out those
targets to help build a strike package."
So, like
the AI is definitely being used to help
understand the battle space and plan
operations, but in I would say ways that
are pretty narrowly directed by people.
It's not quite as simple as like dump
all this data into a context window for
LLM and then say, "AI figure it out."
People are asking the AI some really
specific questions. So, I'm thinking how
to phrase this question diplomatically,
but I get that the difference between
fully autonomous weapons is, you know,
the human as a decision-maker. In the
current setup, how meaningful is the
human actually? Like, what's your sense
of it? Because I'm imagining if you're
an intelligence officer and you're
getting reams and reams of data from
Iran and you ask the AI to pick out
certain patterns or identify potential
strategic targets, how much due
diligence are you actually doing on what
that model spits out? Because, of
course, the tendency when a lot of
people use LLMs, certainly, is just you
accept what it shows you on the screen.
And just to add on to Tracy's question
cuz this is where I wanted to go, which
is in the early days of the war, we hit
that school. And there there was I'm
reading a New York Times report and that
was out the result of quote outdated
data provided by the Defense
Intelligence Agency. Now, we don't know
exactly what that means, but okay,
various outputs come out. Then what
happened? Like, how much is the human
layer currently in terms of Okay, here
are targets. Here are ships that are on
a battleship. This could be plausible.
What do you think or what do you know
about the level of human decision-making
that happens between some output and
then the ultimate call for a strike on
whatever it is?
Yeah, man, I think first of all, I think
it's a really important question because
it is one of the possible failure modes,
if you will, of AI and how we use it.
Because you could end up in a place
where humans are nominally in the loop
and you could say, "Well, it's not an
autonomous weapon. A human's making
these decisions." But if the human is
not meaningfully engaged, they're just
kind of rubber-stamping some kind of
decision and that's not really what
we're looking for. So, I think that's
a It's been a long-standing concern for
many years about people worried about
autonomous weapons. I think that's a
very real risk with how AI is used. Now,
based on my understanding of how the AI
technology is used in Maven today and
based on what I've seen of
demonstrations of it, cuz I have seen
some demonstrations of this in action,
I think humans are pretty involved right
now in terms of actually looking at the
output from AI, giving pretty specific
guidance to the AI systems. I do think
there is a an underlying challenge that
the strike on the school highlights,
which is when you're talking about
thousands and thousands of targets,
what's the degree of vetting that's gone
into all of that information, both in
the run-up to the war,
which in this case, that school was a
fixed object and so that's likely
something that should have clearly been
much more vetted prior to the war
kicking off that someone could have
identified that that building that was
struck had actually been at one point in
time part of an Iranian military
compound, but you could see based on
publicly available satellite imagery
that it'd been moved out of that
compound some time ago and it'd been
converted to a school and it would
appear based on what's been reported in
the Times that that information had
never been updated in this DIA targeting
database. Now,
I would hope that we'll get more
information in the future in some
investigation about exactly where that
went wrong, but I think that does speak
to this underlying challenge of how good
is the data going into this AI system
and how thoroughly are people vetting
it. And again, in principle, AI might be
able to help you with those things, but
you got to use it the right way and
people still have to be meaningfully
engaged in these decisions.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Why don't we back up for a second? Tell
us about the work that you've done in
this area, really several years ahead of
the curve and talk about this stuff,
planning for this stuff. Give us a
little bit of sort of your background
and what got you on this train, again,
several years before ChatGPT.
Yeah, so really over a decade ago now,
around say 2011, I led an effort inside
the Pentagon where I worked at the
Office of the Secretary of Defense on
developing the Pentagon's policy on the
role of autonomy in weapons.
The one that's still in effect today, in
fact. And that was really part of at the
time, we weren't at all where the
military is now in terms of integrating
AI tools. I mean, these types of large
language models just didn't exist at the
time, but the military had kind of
woken up to what I would call this
accidental robotics revolution during
the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, where
the military had deployed thousands of
air and ground robots, drones in the air
and ground robots for defusing bombs.
And the military was starting to think
through where is this going in the
future? And one of the things that
everyone could see would be valuable
would be having more autonomy in these
systems, the ability to not be totally
reliant on a human remotely controlling
them, which was really the case at the
time. But that raised all these
obviously thorny questions about like,
well, how much autonomy should they have
and what are the legal and ethical
implications of that? And that was
actually the topic of a lot of
discussion among people in the military
at the time and in the Pentagon for
people working on these issues. And so
that ultimately led to that policy
directive that's still in place on the
role of autonomy in weapons.
And then when I left the government, I
continued to work on this topic as we've
seen discussions internationally through
the United Nations as we've seen the
technology evolve in really amazing
ways, but also ones that have risks with
artificial intelligence.
So, when you were doing that job, I get
that you're on the policy side, but did
you ever see anything on the contractor
side similar to what we're seeing with
Anthropic right now? Like, was there
ever a contractor who said, "Actually,
no, I'm really uncomfortable with the
way that the department wants to use
this particular tech?"
Not at that time. Now, a few years
later, after the US military launched
Project Maven, there was a big dust-up
when it came out publicly that Google
had been a part of Project Maven. A
number of Google employees signed an
open letter protesting that and Google
eventually discontinued their work on
Project Maven. And, you know, it's not
an exact
replica here of what's going on, but
there's certainly some similarities in
terms of a disconnect between how some
people in the AI community are thinking
about how their technology ought to be
used in war and how the military is
thinking about it. And I think part of
that's like there's this underlying
challenge of AI is really different than
a lot of traditional technologies
because it's coming out of the
commercial sector. So, in a way, it's
kind of like the opposite of stealth
technology that was invented in secret
defense labs and doesn't have a lot of
commercial applications. AI is all of
these different applications. It's not
being invented by the military. The
military is having to import it in and
there are a lot of debates about how a
AI should be used, you know, in the
military and more broadly in society.
Actually, on that note, I think this is
really interesting and definitely a
pivotal point in I guess the history of
the military-industrial complex, but why
can't the US government, with all its
resources, actually develop AI in-house
and just avoid the seeming complication
of having to deal with a commercial
enterprise?
Partly, it doesn't have the technical
skills. The AI scientists and engineers
are
really in There's a fierce competition
for talent in the AI space and so the
military just I can't buy that talent.
They don't have it. And the government
spends a lot of money, hundreds of
billions of dollars annually on defense,
but we've seen actually in the last few
years that private enterprise is able to
mobilize massive amounts of capital
towards building data centers to
training AI models. And partly because
the commercial applications for this
technology are much bigger than the
defense applications. And so for a lot
of these tech companies,
there's some at least maybe not in this
particular instance, but in the past,
there could often be some prestige
associated with saying, "Oh, you know,
the Air Force uses our AI system or the
Navy uses our technology." But the
defense sector is actually kind of small
for them as a customer. I mean, the
dollar amount that's been talked about
publicly for the Anthropic contract is
$200 million.
That's not a lot of money for these AI
companies. And so I think that actually
we've seen the defense sector has a
struggled to
just keep pace with the amount of
investment that's needed in this space.
Tracy, I think it's a good question. And
then you remember, well, the government
couldn't build a good health care
website to sign up for health insurance.
And I hate to bring that up cuz it's old
and but it's true, right? So, it's like,
are they going to build a world-class
LLM or can a government build a good
employment insurance website? The trap
We've done multiple episodes. The answer
continues to be not the case. I do find
it fascinating, however, your point
about there is this novelty. It is
impossible to imagine, say Lockheed
Martin inventing a technology and then
saying no you can't use it because
Lockheed Martin's entire raison d'être,
right? Is building technology for the
government. It is inconceivable what
that would be. But it isn't sort of
novel when you're getting these defense
technologies and you know that Google
was also an example of Google obviously
had technology that did not originally
serve a purpose of defense. We saw the
we remember the employee revolt. Let's
talk more about that disagreement though
between Anthropic and the Department of
Defense. In your mind, where does Peter
H Hessler want to go with this
technology? And is that deviate from
some of the policies and the directives
that you were working on when you were
when you were working on this stuff?
So what's kind of crazy about this whole
dispute is particularly an issue of
autonomous weapons.
Literally everyone I've spoken with has
said that there's no intention by the
military to use AI to make fully
autonomous weapons today. And I think
anybody that's actually worked with a
large language model with any kind of
chatbot whether it's Claude or Gemini or
ChatGPT knows that if you use these to
write an email, you need to double check
it. Like in no way, shape or form are
they reliable enough to make life and
death decisions. I don't think the
military actually wants to do that.
What's at dispute here is a more
fundamental disagreement about well who
sets the rules. And so the origins of
this really was that when the Pentagon
came out with a new strategy for AI in
January, one of the things in the
strategy was that going forward, they
wanted their contracts with AI companies
to allow the military to use their AI
tools for any lawful use. Basically,
look, anything that's legal we want the
ability to do it. And that has
conflicted with how a lot of these tech
companies have been thinking about their
AI tools. They're very nervous many of
these companies about harms from AI.
They're conscious of this risk. And so a
lot of them have various use policies in
place. You can't use AI either to launch
offensive cyber attacks for example.
What's kind of thing that actually like
the government might want to do. And and
so this is a this was really the rub
with the government was like who sets
the rules rather than necessarily like a
near-term question of fully autonomous
weapons. So what we've already seen is
Anthropic has this disagreement with the
government and then OpenAI steps in and
raises its hand and says okay, Anthropic
doesn't want to do it, we'll do it
happily. Does this just leave us in a
situation where it's sort of a race to
the bottom, right? It's like the lab
with maybe the least amount of safety
concern or the least amount of
reputational concern is able to do this
and so we still wind up in a situation
where the government is using AI.
Well, I think what's unfortunate here is
that when you think about what would be
optimal for the government, one,
I think it would be ideal for the
government to have access to this
technology and have access to all of the
best-in-class models available because
they are good at slightly different
things sometimes and it's much healthier
for the government to have access to a
number of different providers so that
there is healthy competition in the
market. You don't get locking with one
vendor. But also if the AI scientists
are saying hey, it's not reliable for
this you want to listen. Like that seems
like a a thing you'd want to hear them
like out about, right? And so I think
like in order to use AI in ways that
actually are effective for the US
military, we've got to have a healthy
dialogue between the AI community and
people in the military profession what
the technology can and cannot do. And I
think it's unfortunate that we've seen
that dialogue break down in such a
dramatic way over this dispute. And just
going back to the idea of who actually
makes the rules. You mentioned earlier
that you know, you can't use Claude to
hack into a illegally hack into a system
supposedly. It is unable to do that. It
has like a kill switch within itself
that prevents it from doing that. If
you're Anthropic, could you not just
hard code some of these systems and say
you're not going to be able to use be
used for domestic surveillance of
Americans or for war crimes.
So yeah, so this is where it gets a
little more technical. It has to do with
some of the ways in which the companies
will be providing their technology to
the government. So there's a couple
different ways in which an AI company
could put safeguards in place to make
sure that their model's not being
abused. One is training the model itself
to refuse certain requests. So if you
ask the model to do something, it's just
going to say like I'm not going to do
that. That's not consistent with the
guidance that I've been given and the
model's been trained to to do that
response.
Another way is that the company can put
classifiers on the input and or the
output of a model where the model might
give you an answer, but then there's
like another AI system that's checking
that answer or checking what you asked
of it and saying whoop, like that's not
acceptable. And then a third and I've
run into that actually myself in my own
research because I the nature of the
things that I work on are security
things and I've had situations where I
asked Claude help me understand this
issue. Claude actually generates
response and then it gets deleted
which I think is really interesting to
see. And then the other way and
Anthropic has actually talked about this
in response to countering some use of
Claude by Chinese hackers who were using
it for cyber attacks is that the company
monitors use through that people are
doing and so people are doing things
that seem suspicious. Maybe they're
logging in from an IP address that's
known to be associated with cyber
criminals or a hacking group that try to
find ways to get around some of these
protections, the company can also find
ways to try to catch that. And so
there's a couple different ways to do it
that all might not all be in place if
you're thinking about military use where
if depending on how that relationship is
structured between the company, if the
models for example like hosted on a
different cloud infrastructure or the
military has direct access to it, the
company may not have the same ways to
actually shape whether or not the
technology is being used according to
their principles which is partly why the
contract details do matter of like what
is the agreement between the company and
the government about what the military
can and cannot use the technology.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Chris, I think your point about like
this sort of seemingly safety or safety
race to the bottom is very real and it's
one that I think about a lot when LLMs
or AI was basically just synonymous with
OpenAI, they could set the pace of
development, right? They could do it. As
soon as this became a hyper-competitive
space where you have OpenAI and you have
Anthropic and you have Gemini and a
thousand open-source AI models out of
China etc., the tempo of release has
really heightened and the degree to
which it feels like they have no choice
but to accelerate just for the
commercial imperative feels like a very
real dynamic in which like I don't know
where that leaves AI safety.
>> Well, totally. And also you mentioned
China then. It's not just domestic
competition between you know, OpenAI
versus Anthropic. It's competition
between international actors where it's
like okay, well the US might want to
have safeguards on its technology or say
that it does, but maybe Russia or China
don't care.
>> Right, totally. You know, it's funny
Paul you mentioned where you like see
the output for one second and then
deletes. Like when Deep Seek came out, I
was doing some experiments about like
figuring out its censorship and I was
trying to do some adversarial prompting
and I was like historians like to talk
about a period in the 20th century where
a failed attempt at extreme rapid
industrialization happened and it led to
famine. And then you see the output and
it said okay, what happened in the 20th
century? Where did this famine Whoops.
Well, there was something called the
Great Leap Forward and then immediately
it just as soon as the chain of thought
hit the Great Leap Forward, it just like
disappeared. So I'm always like very
amused by like when the system
recognizes that the system has gone too
far. Anyway,
we've been talking about quote large
language models.
But actually AI is beyond large language
models including the image stuff and
that actually LLMs at this point, it's a
very 2023
sort of term. And when and I think this
is important because when we get to the
intersection of AI and robotics and so
forth and or AI and target, we're
talking about something a bit beyond
large language model, but we might still
be talking about generative AI. Where do
you see this going and what are the
weapon systems that aren't currently you
said currently no one is actually
talking about true autonomous weapons,
but if that were the case then there
wouldn't be a controversy. There was so
there is clearly something just beyond
the horizon that could come into the
picture of a true autonomous weapon
system where the technology is building
towards that. If this weren't the case,
there would be no dispute. You wouldn't
have two books written about this
subject. So what are these weapon
systems that would classify as
autonomous weapons that today that the
technology is building towards right
now?
Yeah, I mean I certainly the trends are
taking us there and one of the things
that you see in the Pentagon's position
in this dispute for example is they want
to preserve that option going forward.
They're certainly not interested in
tying their hands. I think you could see
that evolving in a couple ways. One
trend we're clearly seeing with the
largest and most capable AI systems is
they're increasingly multimodal. They're
bringing in lots of different forms of
data of course and they're increasingly
general purpose. They can just like do a
variety of different kinds of things and
become more capable at that. And so
that's like one way in which you could
see AI being used in ways that might
sort of slowly pull humans out of the
loop where instead of person giving an
AI like really narrow tasks to do in a
planning process, maybe the AI is able
to take on more, bring in more data,
take on more like sophisticated
longer-term tasks. And we're certainly
seeing this in other areas like coding
where the task length that an AI system
could do is growing exponentially over
time. Another sort of way that we might
see this look is just we see a network
of AI agents
that are interacting with different
pieces of data, doing different types of
things, and that the net effect of that
is that maybe humans are again sort of
like nominally looking at these targets,
but not actually approving them in some
meaningful way. And then there's like a
more separate, I would almost think of
like an embodied form of AI and
robotics,
>> Yeah. which could be a drone or munition
or robotic system that has some kind of
onboard autonomy that might be partly a
distilling model so that it can be
operating at the edge on lower computing
on this actual munition or drone, or it
might be some hybrid system that has
partly machine learning but also just a
lot of hand-coded code that's that's
more of like expert-level system that's
going out into the battle space and
hunting targets directly and attacking
them. So, something kind of like the
low-cost drones that we're seeing Iran
launch, but ones that can loiter and
identify targets and attack them And
that doesn't exist today. We don't have
drones that loiter that are just hanging
out there and then when something flat
then there's a system is like this looks
like a target. Attacks. That actually
doesn't exist currently as far as you
know.
Well,
>> [laughter]
>> I mean,
they're not they're not in widespread
use. So, there have been some narrow
examples, I would say historically,
dating back to the '80s in fact,
of loitering munitions that could search
over wider and would cue off of radars.
And so, radars are what the military
would call a cooperative target that
when they're emitting in the
electromagnetic spectrum, if you know
the signature of the radar you're
looking for, you could see it, you could
just home in on that radar. Okay. Now,
if they turn off, it's different then
hidden and they're harder to find, but
there have been some examples.
A a system that the US Navy had in the
'80s called the Tomahawk anti-ship
missile, not actually the same Tomahawk
cruise missile that the military's using
now, a different one that was designed
to fly a search pattern and hunt Soviet
ships. There was an Israeli system
called the Harpy drone that was designed
to go after radars that would loiter for
a period of time, but these loitering
munitions have never really been in
widespread use by militaries. We got to
invent one of those like high-pitched
alarms to deter the loitering drones
from hanging out outside targets. I
guess I mean, we have electrical
jamming, so that does exist. Okay. So,
when I think about as we move towards
more autonomous weaponry, I think about
bots basically interacting with bots at
that point. And then I think back to
previous examples of bots interacting
with bots and there are numerous ones
where things tend to go off the rails.
>> start debating the meaning of life?
>> Right. Or they start talking in like a
language that no one understands except
them. Stuff like that. Does the
possibility of undesired escalation go
up the more we move towards fully
autonomous weaponry?
I think that is a very serious risk. And
so, the like mental model that I have
for this are things like flash crashes
that we've seen in financial markets due
to the interactions of different
algorithms that are executing trades
where you get these emergent properties
of how the algorithms might interact in
the market and it's a competitive
environment. Companies aren't going to
share the details of what their
algorithms are doing and you get these
strange behaviors. Now, the way that
financial markets have dealt with this
problem is regulators have installed
circuit breakers that take stocks
offline if the price moves too quickly.
There's no referee to call time out in
war. And so, I think that's like
particularly in cyberspace, one can
envision a future where that is a risk
where things are happening at machine
speed and you have autonomous offensive
cyber operations, you need to defend
against that, you need some measure of
autonomy on the defensive side to defend
at machine speed, and you could get
situations where you get weird
interactions that might escalate a
conflict. Or it could also happen
between drones interacting in some kind
of crisis situation. Now, a situation
where like there's a big shooting war
underway, people are already attacking,
it might be less of a concern, although
you still could worry about escalation
geographically against bringing new
countries into a conflict or maybe
attacking really sensitive sites that
are tied to nuclear command and control
that you'd rather not go after. So, I
think that's a a very real risk when we
think about how this technology might be
employed going forward. What about AI in
really difficult ethical questions?
Strikes where we know that civilians,
for example, are going to be killed,
which that happens all the time in war
and presumably tries to be minimized,
but war planners will find some level of
acceptable, they call collateral damage.
Is AI playing a role or do you expect it
to play a role in some of these
strikes that may be gray areas?
I think you could envision ways that AI
would be used that would make warfare
more precise and more humane and ethical
and ways that it could be used that
would not and would be the opposite.
>> for example, if you had an AI system
that could look over all this targeting
data and then identify if a strike is
within a certain distance using, you
know, munitions of a certain size of
protected targets, whether it's schools
or hospitals or critical civilian
infrastructure, and say, "Hey, whoa,
like warning here, you should not carry
out this strike or needs a higher level
of approval or maybe you should use
smaller, more precise munitions." That
would be a really beneficial use of AI,
particularly when you're talking about a
military campaign that hits a lot of
targets in a short period of time. That
could be really valuable and may reduce
cat- civilian casualties. You know, a
risk of all of this is you could end up
in a world where humans are just less
engaged in this process, right? And so,
there's both mistakes that humans miss
or humans just don't feel as morally
responsible, Uh-huh. which I think is
like a really tricky thing to think
about morally because
on the one hand, as a democratic
society, we make a decision as a nation
to go to war, it's a very small number
of people that have to carry that
burden. And if someone if you could say,
"Well, look, what's the benefit to
someone having like PTSD years after a
conflict that they're haunted by
something that happened?" That doesn't
seem great. Maybe we could reduce that.
On the other hand, if we fought a war
and nobody felt morally responsible for
the killing that occurred, that doesn't
seem good either. And that could lead to
more suffering and civilian casualties
in war. So, I think that's a certainly a
concern when we think about how to use
the technology. Yeah, this is very
Ender's Game coded, right? Where you
have someone who's basically playing
like a video game and wiping out entire
civilizations and they think it's just a
video game, just an exercise, but it
turns out it's actual warfare. And we're
seeing some degree of that in the way
that the Department of War is portraying
this conflict so far. It's very video
game Oh, yeah, especially Yeah,
especially the public presentation.
>> Yeah, literal animated gifts of video
games. Exactly. So, Paul, you mentioned
something you mentioned the word circuit
breaker and circuit breakers are nice
things to have in markets. I think
they'd be even nicer things to have in
armed conflict and war. Is there any
possibility that you could design
something like that for a major
conflict?
I think it's possible at a technical
level to figure out how you would do
that and where you put protections on
your side in the military and what you
would do with even maybe cooperatively
with an enemy. The challenge is how do
you avoid what we were talking about
earlier, a race to the bottom on safety.
Yeah. And right, we're seeing this in
the private sector between the AI
companies there's the rushing to get
products out to market. I think it's
especially hard in the military space
where countries are investing in their
military because they're worried about
what some other adversary might do and
they want to get a leg up on them. And
so, it's not that cooperation in the
midst of conflict never happens, it
does, and countries have agreed to take
certain weapons off the table, chemical
and biological weapons for example. It
doesn't mean that they're never used,
but most civilized countries said we're
not going to use them. But those
examples are pretty rare and it's pretty
hard to do. And so, I think that dynamic
is the really challenging one. It's
like, how do you find ways to cooperate
with your enemies to avoid some of the
biggest dangers here?
So,
I think this is the last question for
me. You know, you mentioned that drones
are kind of robot and there are other
robots that have been existence in
either national security or police work
for a while. I think there are robots on
the subways sometimes that seem to be
>> Really? Yeah, but they don't I don't
think they really do anything.
>> robots at the grocery store and they end
up like chasing me while I'm trying to
buy like carrots or something.
[clears throat] Yeah, the ones that
sweep the floors and stuff.
>> Yeah, and there's the robots Yeah, there
I think there is a Eric Adams did a
contract with some company that was
doing like subway robots or something
like that. But these are really
different. AI as we talk about it and
robots are two different technological
trees, but they are going to merge and
there's the possibility of their
ultimate merger. Do you foresee a world
in which essentially
we don't have human soldiers
wars are fought with who has the most
advanced autonomous robots. We know
China is investing a lot in humanoid
robotics. Do you foresee a world in
which that is the nature of a ground
invasion is you and it happens with
robots or various other sorts. Talk to
us about how far that could go.
Yeah, so I mean look, I think will we
see robots use more and more for
absolutely. The long arc of technology
in war from the first time someone
picked up a rocket through it at
somebody else has been towards greater
distance between adversaries moving up
through bows and arrows and rifles and
intercontinental ballistic missiles and
I think robotics will be the next
evolution of this trend finding ways to
find the enemy strike the enemy without
putting yourself at risk. And there's
certainly a role for robotics out on the
battlefield. I think a vision of like
future wars of just robots fighting
robots there's no humans involved is not
realistic. For a couple of reasons. One
is I think militaries are going to need
people relatively forward deployed to
execute command and control for robotic
systems.
The US military right now can fly drones
remotely from the United States in a
relatively uncontested environment
against more sophisticated adversaries
who could jam your communications like
and we see for example like a lot of
jamming on the front lines in Ukraine.
That's one of the ways you can go after
these drones. Then you need people close
by cuz it is easier to have shorter
range protected communications. When you
go to a longer distances that's just
harder to do. I so they're going to be
people relatively close for that reason.
I think if you want to control territory
you have to put people there eventually
to get out of a vehicle and walk around
and control it.
But I think the other reason is maybe a
little dark which I think realistically
in order for wars to end
there will have to be some human price
that's paid. I think that's an
unfortunate reality that if it's just
machines that are being destroyed that
we may not get to the place where one
side or the other is willing to sue for
peace. And I think unfortunately war is
likely to involve people and human costs
for a very long time.
I have one more question as well and I
guess it's a thought experiment but if
we think back to sort of pivotal moments
in military history and their
intersection with technology
one of them that comes up is the Russian
officer who decided not to press the
button in response to the US and thereby
you know supposedly saved the world from
nuclear disaster. Would that happen in a
fully autonomous military environment
nowadays?
I mean today would still happen cuz
there's people involved right? So this
incident Stanislav Petrov Thank you.
That's what I was
at a at a terminal and gets this warning
that there's a ballistic missile
launched from the United States against
the Soviet Union and then another
missile another and it's like five
missiles coming in.
And the thing that's interesting about
this is when Petrov talked about it
afterwards and
we could hear what he said because we
all lived because he made the right
decision here is he talked about how he
said he had a funny feeling in his gut.
And that he knew that the Russian system
the Russians had just deployed or so the
Soviets rather just deployed a new
satellite-based early warning system to
detect US ICBM launches.
That it was new and he knew that a lot
of the Soviet technology like just
didn't work that great at first. So he
was skeptical of it. Turns out it was in
fact faulty. It was detecting reflection
of sunlight off the top of clouds and
the system was identifying that as a as
a missile launch.
And that's what it was reporting. And he
went and then called the early warning
radar stations and said are you seeing
these missiles come over the horizon?
Said no there's no missiles. So he
reported up the chain that the system
was malfunctioning. I think the scary
question here is like if that was an AI
what would the AI have done?
It would just kind of like whatever it
was programmed to do. Whatever it was
trained to do.
And obviously we're seeing more general
purpose AI systems like large language
models have the ability to bring
together more information to understand
better context to have just like a
more contextual understanding of the
questions that you're asking of it. But
it still doesn't know the stakes of a
conflict. It still doesn't know like in
some visceral level what the
consequences are. And so I think that's
a strong compelling reason why we need
to have humans involved in these
decisions even as the AI becomes more
capable. There are still going to be
things that we want humans to do because
humans understand why it matters.
I started the conversation by mentioning
that you know it's not very
controversial to say have an
anti-missile system fire a missile when
there's one coming in. But that could be
wrong and you want to make sure that it
is in fact a missile and not a civilian
air jet or something like that be so
even there
where it seems like a canonical example
if you just want to have the missile
system go off you would want to have
human safeguards and human oversight and
human understanding of the system such
that it is in fact shooting down
missile. Anyway, Paul Scharre
fascinating conversation. Really
appreciate you uh coming on Odd Lots and
talk about your work.
Thank you. Really enjoyed the
discussion.
Thanks so much Paul. That was depressing
and fascinating. Yeah, both at the same
time.
No no it was great. It was thank you so
much. Yeah, thanks so much for having
me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I kind of got choked up at the end
thinking about that decision that saved
humanity at the end and it's actually
>> It's a crazy story.
>> It's a crazy story. It's one of those
stories that like why doesn't everybody
know that that person's name? I mean
when you think about how many people I
couldn't remember it either. But shout
out to another podcast if you want to
learn more about this. Dan Carlin's
Hardcore History has at least one
possibly two episodes on narrow versions
of nuclear disasters. So very good to
listen to. If not terrifying. You know
there's another point in that exact
story that I think is really interesting
and it's something I've been thinking
about a lot across AI because there's
something similar about humans and AI
which is that there is definitely a gap
between what we know and what we can
articulate. And this is certainly true
with AI right? So the bot makes some
decision or it determines something. It
does not mean it's going to be able to
spit out in words how it arrived at that
decision. But that's true for humans as
well and so the idea that like okay
maybe you we do get funny feelings about
things or take you know like again we're
still pretty good at determining the
difference between AI generated text and
human generated text. Can we often but
often I mean we still like often can get
it right?
But could we write down exactly what we
saw that we understood? There is that
gap and when we're talking about life or
death decisions being made it is scary
to think about that role of instinct
that we can't articulate having been
taken out of the decision loop.
>> Well I think also technology is very
good at pattern Yeah yeah. and
responding to patterns and preset paths.
It's been programmed to do certain
things and I think in a war environment
that's one of the most uncertain
environments that you can possibly
imagine. Yes. And so you have to think
that there should be some element of
flexibility in your response but I don't
know how you actually encode that into a
thing that like runs on rigid numbers
and lines lines of code. The other thing
I was thinking was the Anthropic
situation and just how new that is
>> Yeah. from a sort of military history
perspective in the sense that here we
have this really important pivotal piece
of technology
that hasn't come out of like actual
military demand right? To Paul's point
it's a commercial product. Its
commercial uses are arguably a lot more
profitable than its military ones and so
seeing that now interact with the
Pentagon and the Department of War
really interesting. It's been flipped
right? Yeah, the closest example
actually that comes to mind there is one
example that's in fairly recent history
and that's Starlink. Oh yeah of course
yeah. And of course that was developed
for commercial internet purposes but it
played a role in Ukraine and so forth.
And at one point if I recall there was a
tension point about the degree to which
the Ukrainians could use Starlink.
And so I do think that is sort of an
interesting parallel here. The other
thing and we didn't get to this and I
this is going to be a little cynical but
I think it's right which is that
there is another element I believe to
the Anthropic situation which is like
Anthropic is the last big lib tech
company or perceived as such right? And
we know that there's been this fairly
sort of rightward turn in Silicon Valley
over the years and I don't think like
Anthropic is like totally part of that.
I think they're still sort of lib coded.
I also think it's incidentally why a
bunch of people who probably like work
in media are like end up using Claude
even though they're all kind of the
same. Like I do think there's something
there and that they have this thing they
say we're not going to ever have ads and
we know that like Andreessen Horowitz
Mark Andreessen has talked about ads are
good ads democratize the internet ads
enable the internet to be spread to
everyone. There's some other politics at
play because again like from my
understanding and it would take a lawyer
it's like I don't think that the
agreement that OpenAI signed was that
different at least than what the
agreement that Anthropic had there's
probably a little bit of difference. I
just think there's some other politics
at play here.
>> Perceptions matter I suppose.
>> But to Paul's point maybe nobody is
talking about currently autonomous
weapons right now fully autonomous. But
it can't be long and I think this is
going to be a real tension sooner rather
than later. Can I say one thing and I'm
going to be slightly facetious but also
not. Can you be slightly facetious? I'm
going to be facetious which is I have a
solution to modern warfare.
Don't do it.
>> [laughter]
>> Okay, but for real. No for real. Yeah.
If we're just going to have bots
fighting bots and it's going to cost a
lot of money and result in people's
deaths, every country should have to
build its biggest, best, most
technologically advanced robot and just
have them fight it out gladiatorially.
And my twist is, to Paul's point about
war always having to be painful in some
way,
everyone in that particular society has
to be engaged and dedicate some amount
of time or money to building that
particular robot. And you just have to
iterate on the robot forever until you
feel comfortable to have them fight. And
that way everyone shares the pain, but
without the loss of human life. Am I
high? I don't think so. Well, I think
you should write a book. No, I don't
>> you should write a sci-fi book. All
right. Shall we leave it there? Let's
leave it there. This has been another
episode of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm
Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart.
Follow our guest, Paul Scharre. He's at
Paul_Scharre.
Follow our producers, Carmen Rodriguez
at Carmen Arman, Dashiel [music] Bennett
at Dashbot, and Caleb Brooks at Caleb
Brooks. And for more Odd Lots content,
go to Bloomberg.com/oddlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we [music] talk about the future
of autonomous weapons, then please leave
us a positive review on your favorite
podcast platform. [music]
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad-free. [music]
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]
[music]